# Tools

There are several major tools that we have developed, or are contributing to,
as a part of this project. This page describes a few major components.

## MyST - Markedly Structured Text

([link to documentation](https://myst-parser.readthedocs.io/en/latest/))

MyST is an attempt to combine the simplicity and readability of Markdown with
the power and flexibility of reStructuredText, along with the Sphinx platform. It
starts with the CommonMark markdown specification, and selectively adds a few
extra syntax pieces to utilize the most powerful parts of reStructuredText.

The [MyST Sphinx parser](https://myst-parser.readthedocs.io/en/latest/)
allows users to write their entire documentation in
markdown, while utilizing all of the main features of Sphinx.

## MyST-NB

([link to documentation](https://myst-nb.readthedocs.io/))

MyST-NB allows users to parse Jupyter Notebooks directly into their Sphinx
documentation, utilizing the MyST Sphinx parser under the hood. This allows
readers to leverage the MyST syntax in markdown cells in order to build
*computational documentation* that builds on the Jupyter ecosystem. It is also
a collection of tools for controlling the output behavior of notebooks in
Sphinx documentation, and a text-based representation of Jupyter Notebooks
using pure markdown.

## Jupyter Cache

([link to repository](https://github.com/executablebookproject/jupyter-cache))

Jupyter Cache is a lightweight tool for executing and cacheing
collections of Jupyter Notebooks (or text-based versions of those notebooks).
It allows users to store the outputs generated by running notebooks, to cache
these results, and then to selectively update the cache as-needed when
content is changed.
